---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 1"
due-date: 2019-02-01
class: s2019-317
class-name: "Math 317"
assignment: 1
points: 25
solutions: true
---

{:.alert .alert-primary}
Solutions to proof questions are not unique! There may be many different ways to prove any one statement. Remember this as you read solutions---these are only sample proofs!

1.  (1.1) Prove $$1^2 + 2^2 + 3^2 + \cdots + n^2 = \tfrac 16 n(n+1)(2n+1)$$ for
    all positive integers $$n$$.
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > **Proof.** By induction.
    >
    > *Base case*. $$P_1$$ holds because $$1 = 1^2 = \tfrac 16 1(2)(3) = 1$$.
    >
    > *Induction step*. Assume $$P_n: \sum_{i=1}^n{i^2} = \tfrac 16 n(n+1)(2n+1)$$ holds. Consider the LHS of $$P_{n+1}$$:
    >
    > $$\sum_{i=1}^{n+1}{i^2} = \sum_{i=1}^n{i^2} + (n+1)^2 = \tfrac 16 n(n+1)(2n+1) + (n+1)^2$$ 
    >
    > where we have used the induction hypothesis. Factoring out $$(n+1)$$ from both terms yields that
    >
    > $$
    > \sum_{i=1}^{n+1}{i^2} = (n+1)\left(\frac {2n^2+n + 6n+6}6 \right) = \frac 16 (n+1)((n+1)+1)(2(n+1)+1).
    > $$
    >
    > So $$P_{n+1}$$ holds, and by induction, all $$P_k$$ hold for all $$k \in \mathbb N$$. $$\Box$$
    
2.  (1.6) Prove $$11^n - 4^n$$ is divisible by 7 when $$n$$ is a positive
    integer. (An integer $$k$$ is divisible by an integer $$q$$ if there exists
    an integer $$m$$ so that $$k = mq$$.)
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > **Proof.** By induction.
    >
    > *Base case*. $$P_1$$ holds because $$11 - 4 = 7$$ which is trivially divisible by 7.
    >
    > *Induction step*. Assume $$P_n$$ holds; this means that we assume that there exists $$m \in \mathbb Z$$ so that $$11^n - 4^n = 7m$$. Consider 
    >
    > $$11^{n+1} - 4^{n+1} = 11(11^n)-4(4^n).$$
    >
    > We have that $$11 = 7+4$$ so we get that
    > 
    > $$11(11^n)-4(4^n) = 7(11^n) + 4(11^n) - 4(4^n) = 7(11^n) + 4(11^n - 4^n) = 7(11^n) + 4(7m)$$
    >
    > where we have used the inductive hypothesis in the last step. So, 
    >
    > $$11^{n+1} - 4^{n+1} = 7(11^n + 4m);$$ 
    > 
    > as $$11^n + 4n$$ is an integer, we conclude that $$7$$ divides $$11^{n+1} - 4^{n+1}$$, hence that $$P_{n+1}$$ is true.
    >
    > So by induction, for all $$k \in \mathbb N$$, $$P_k$$ is true. $$\Box$$

3.  (4.3, partial) For each subset of $$\mathbb R$$ below, determine both the
    **supremum** and the **infimum**, if they exist. If either doesn't exist,
    say so. You do not need to give a rigorous proof of your answer.
    
    1.  $$A = \{ 3, 4, 5 \}$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > $$\inf A = 3$$; $$\sup A = 5$$.
    
    2.  $$B = \left\{n + \dfrac {(-1)^n}n \;:\; n \in \mathbb N \right\}$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > $$\inf B = 0$$; $$\sup B = +\infty$$. (For this question, it's also okay if you say it DNE).
    
    3.  $$C = \left\{\sin\left(\dfrac{n\pi}{3}\right) \;:\; n \in \mathbb N \right\}$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
            
        > $$\inf C = -\sqrt 3/2$$; $$\sup C = \sqrt 3/2$$. This set only has 3 elements.
    
    4.  $$D = \{ r \;:\; r \in \mathbb Q,\; r^2 < 3 \}$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > $$\inf D = -\sqrt 3$$; $$\sup D = \sqrt 3$$. Even though $$D \subset \mathbb Q$$, it is still a subset of the real numbers, so it has an infimum and supremum (an we know what they are).
    
    5.  $$E = \left\{ 1 - \dfrac{1}{3^n} \;:\; n \in \mathbb N \right\}$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > $$\inf E = 2/3$$; $$\sup E = 1$$. $$1$$ is certainly an upper bound. Proof that it is the least upper bound:
        >
        > Let $$a < 1$$. Then $$1 > 1-a > 0$$ and so let $$n > -\log_3(1-a)$$ be a natural number which exists by the Archimedean property. So then $$1 - 3^{-n} > 1 - 3^{\log_3(1-a)} = 1 - 1 + a = a$$. So $$a$$ cannot be an upper bound. So $$1$$ is indeed the least upper bound. 

4.  Don't worry about writing out any formal proofs in this problem. Decide
    whether each of the following statements is true. If the statement is **true**,
    you don't need to do anything more. If the statement is **false**, give a
    concrete example (that is, a counterexample) that shows the statement
    failing.
    
    1.  For a nonempty, bounded set $$S \subseteq \mathbb R$$, $$\inf S < \sup
        S$$.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > False. Let $$S$$ be a set of one element.
    
    2.  If $$r \ne 0$$ is rational and $$\alpha$$ is irrational, then
        $$r\alpha$$ is irrational.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > True. Were $$r\alpha = p/q$$ for some integers $$p,q$$ then $$\alpha = p/(rq)$$ which would be a rational number (why?).
        
    3.  If $$T \subset S \subset \mathbb R$$, $$T$$ is nonempty and $$S$$ is
        bounded, then $$\sup T \le \sup S$$.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > True. If $$\sup S$$ is an upper bound for $$T$$ as $$\forall t \in T, t \in S$$ (definition of subset) so $$\sup S \ge t$$. As $$\sup T$$ is a least upper bound for $$T$$, it must be at most as big as the upper bound $$\sup S$$.
        
    4.  A finite, nonempty set always contains its supremum.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > True. Finite, nonempty sets have maximums, which agree with supremums when they exist.
    
5.  Let $$A$$ be a nonempty set of real numbers which is bounded below. Let
    $$-A$$ be the set $$\{ -x \;:\; x \in A \}$$. Prove that
    
    $$
    \inf A = -\sup(-A).
    $$
    
    (Note: This is the bulk of the proof of Corollary 4.5. You're welcome to make use of all of the theorems and properties in Section 3, including Theorem 3.2. $$\mathbb R$$ is an ordered field.)
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > **Proof.**
    >
    > Let $$M = \sup(-A)$$. For any element $$x \in A$$, we have that $$-x \in -A$$ by definition of $$-A$$. By definition of supremum, we have then that $$M \ge -x$$. By theorem 3.2, multiplying both sides by $$-1$$ yields that $$-M \le x$$. As this holds for all $$x \in A$$, we conclude that $$-M$$ is a lower bound for $$A$$.
    >
    > Consider any lower bound $$t$$ of $$A$$. This means that $$t \le x$$ for all $$x \in A$$. Theorem 3.2 then says that $$-t \ge -x$$ for all $$x \in A$$, which means that $$-t \ge y$$ for all $$y \in -A$$ by definition of $$-A$$. So $$t$$ is an upper bound for $$-A$$. As $$M$$ is the supremum of $$-A$$, it is lesser than any other upper bound so that $$M \le -t$$. Theorem 3.2 then says that $$-M \ge t$$. This is true for any lower bound $$t$$ of $$A$$, so $$-M$$ is indeed the infimum of the set $$A$$; that is, $$-M = \inf(A)$$.
    >
    > We conclude then that $$\inf A = -\sup(-A)$$. $$\Box$$
