---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 6"
due-date: 2019-10-18
class: f2019-317
class-name: "Math 317"
class-uids: 
  - 89757
assignment: 6
points: 25
solutions: false
---

**Reading**: 
Read sections 17, 18, 19

**Exercises**:

1.  Determine which of the following series converge. Justify your answers.

    1.  \$$\displaystyle\sum { \left[ \cos \left( \frac {n \pi}{2} \right)\right]^n }$$
    
    2.  \$$\displaystyle\sum_{n=2}^{\infty} { \frac{(-1)^n}{n - \sqrt{n}} }$$
            
    3.  \$$\displaystyle\sum_{n=2}^\infty { \frac {1}{\sqrt n \log n} }$$
            
    4.  \$$\displaystyle\sum { \frac {\log n}{n^3} }$$
    
2.  This question is worth double points.
    1.  Prove that $$x^m$$ is a continuous function for any $$m \in \mathbb N$$.
    
    2.  Prove that every polynomial function $$\sum_{i=0}^n{a_i x^i}$$ is
        continuous.
        
    3.  A rational function \\(g\\) is a quotient of polynomials \\(p,q\\):
        \\(g(x) = p(x)/q(x)\\), whose domain is \\(\\{x \in \mathbb R : q(x) \ne
        0\\}\\). Prove that every rational function is continuous.
    
3.  
    1.  Let $$f(x) = 1$$ for rational numbers $$x$$ and $$f(x) = 0$$ for
        irrational numbers. Show that $$f$$ is discontinous at every $$x$$ in $$\mathbb R$$.
        
    2.  Recall the function $$f(x)$$ from part (a). Let $$g(x)$$ be the function
        with domain $$\mathbb Q$$ defined as $$g(x) = f(x)$$ for all $$x \in
        \mathbb Q$$. Show that $$g$$ is continuous on its domain.

    3.  Let $$h(x) = x$$ for rational numbers $$x$$ and $$h(x) = 0$$ for
        irrational numbers. Show that $$h$$ is continuous at $$0$$ and at no other point.
    
4.  Let $$E \subseteq \mathbb R$$ be a set of real numbers. An element $$s_0 \in
    E$$ is *interior* to $$E$$ if for some $$r > 0$$ we have
    
    $$
    \{ s \in \mathbb R : |s - s_0| < r\} = (s_0 - r, s_0 + r) \subset E.
    $$
    
    The set $$E$$ is *open in $$\mathbb R$$* if every point in $$E$$ is interior
    to $$E$$.
    
    Let $$f: \mathbb R \to \mathbb R$$ be a function, and for any subset $$V
    \subset \mathbb R$$, let $$f^{-1}(V) \subset \mathbb R$$ be the set;
    
    $$
    f^{-1}(V) = \{ x \in \mathbb R : f(x) \in V \}.
    $$
    
    Show that $$f$$ is continuous if and only if, for every open
    set $$U \subset \mathbb R$$, $$f^{-1}(U)$$ is also an open set.
