---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 7"
due-date: 2019-10-25
class: f2019-317
class-name: "Math 317"
class-uids: 
  - 89757
assignment: 7
points: 25
solutions: true
---

**Reading**: 
Read sections 20, 23, 24

**Exercises**:

1.  Let \\(f\\) be uniformly continuous on a **bounded** set \\(S\\). Prove that \\(f\\) is bounded (on the set \\(S\\)).

    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    **Proof**. Assume that $$f$$ is uniformly continuous on $$S$$ but
    suppose to the contrary that $$f$$ is unbounded on $$S$$. Then for all
    $$n \in \mathbb N$$, there exists as number $$x_n$$ so that $$f(x_n) >
    n$$. Use these to define the sequence $$(x_n)$$.
    
    $$S$$ is bounded, so by the Bolzano-Weierstrauss theorem, there exists a
    convergent, *hence Cauchy*, subsequence $$(x_{n_k})$$. As $$f$$ is
    assumed to be uniformly continuous, this means that $$(f(x_{n_k}))$$ is
    itself a Cauchy, hence convergent, sequence. Say it converges to the
    number $$y$$.
    
    But for all $$n_k$$, we have that $$f(x_{n_k}) > n_k$$. As the sequence
    \\((n_k)\\) diverges to \\(+\infty\\), this implies that the sequence \\((f_{n_k})\\) cannot
    possibly converge to $$y$$, a contradiction. Hence $$f$$ must be bounded on
    $$S$$. $$\Box$$
    
    </div>

2.  Give an example of each of the following, or explain why one does not exist.

    1.  A function that is continuous on \\([a,b]\\) but not uniformly continuous.
    
    2.  A function that is continuous on \\((a,b)\\) but not bounded.
    
    3.  Two functions \\(f\\) and \\(g\\) so that neither \\(f\\) nor \\(g\\) is continuous at \\(x_0 = 1\\) but \\(fg\\) is.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    1.  Cannot exist; by theorem 19.2 all functions continuous on \\([a,b]\\) are uniformly continuous on \\([a,b]\\).
    
    2.  Consider for instance \\(f(x) = 1/x\\) on \\((0,1)\\).
    
    3.  Consider for instance \\(f(x) = 1\\) except \\(f(1) = 0\\) and \\(g(x) = 0\\) except \\(g(1) = 10\\). Then \\((fg)(x) = 0\\) which is constant and hence continuous, while neither \\(f\\) nor \\(g\\) were at \\(x=1\\).
    
    </div>

3.  Show that \\(x = \cos x\\) for some \\(x \in [0, \pi]\\).

    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    Consider \\(g(x) = \cos x - x\\); \\(g(0) = 1\\) and \\(g(\pi) = 1-\pi < 0\\). \\(g(x)\\) is continuous, so by the Intermediate Value Theorem there exists \\(c \in [0, \pi]\\) with \\(g(c) = 0\\), *i.e.*, \\(\cos c = c\\).
    
    </div>

4.  Recall the definition of *open set* from homework 6.

    1.  If \\(A\\) and \\(B\\) are open sets, prove that \\(A \cap B\\) and \\(A \cup B\\) are open.
    
    2.  Prove that if \\((A_i)\\) is a sequence of open sets then \\(B = \bigcup_{i=1}^{\infty} A_i = \\{ x : x \in A_i \textrm{ for some } i \in \mathbb N \\}\\) is also open.
    
    3.  Find a sequence of open sets \\((A_i)\\) for which the set \\(\bigcap_{i=1}^\infty A_i = \\{x : x \in A_i \textrm{ for all } i \in \mathbb N\\}\\) is not open.

    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    1.  If \\(x \in A \cap B\\), then \\(x\\) is interior to \\(A\\) and \\(B\\), meaning there exists \\(r > 0\\) with \\(B_r(x) = (x-r, x+r)\\) a subset of both \\(A\\) and \\(B\\). This means that \\(B_r(x) \subseteq A \cap B\\). So \\(x\\) is interior; \\(x\\) is arbitrary, so the set is open.
    
        If \\(x \in A \cup B\\), then without loss of generality \\(x\\) is interior to \\(A\\), meaning there exists \\(r > 0\\) with \\(B_r(x) = (x-r, x+r)\\) which is a subset of \\(A\\). This means that \\(B_r(x) \subseteq A \cup B\\). So \\(x\\) is interior; \\(x\\) is arbitrary, so the set is open.
        
    2.  If \\(x \in \bigcup_{i=1}^\infty A_i\\), then \\(x\\) is interior to \\(A_k\\) for some \\(k\\), meaning there exists \\(r > 0\\) with \\(B_r(x) = (x-r, x+r)\\) a subset of \\(A_k\\). So every \\(x' \in B_r(x)\\) is in \\(A_k\\) and hence also in \\(\bigcup_{i=1}^\infty A_i\\). This means that \\(B_r(x) \subseteq \bigcup_{i=1}^\infty A_i\\). So \\(x\\) is interior; \\(x\\) is arbitrary, so the set is open.
    
    3.  Consider for instance \\(A_i = (-1/i, 1/i)\\). Then the only element of \\(\bigcap_{i=1}^\infty A_i\\) is \\(0\\) (all other reals are not in \\(A_k\\) for some \\(k\\) sufficiently large). So \\(\bigcap_{i=1}^\infty A_i = \\{0\\}\\), which is not open by definition.
    
    </div>
