---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 8"
due-date: 2019-11-01
class: f2019-317
class-name: "Math 317"
class-uids: 
  - 89757
assignment: 8
points: 20
solutions: true
---

**Reading**: 
Read sections 25, 28, 29.

**Exercises**:

1.  Give an example of each of the following:

    1.  A function which is bounded on a set \\(S\\) but not uniformly continuous on \\(S\\).
    
    2.  A function \\(f\\) and a point \\(a\\) for which \\(\lim_{x \to
        a^{+}} f(x) \ne \lim_{x \to a^{-}} f(x)\\) (and both limits exist).

    3.  A function \\(f\\) and a point \\(a\\) for which \\(\lim_{x \to
        a^{\mathbb Q}} f(x) \ne \lim_{x \to a^{\mathbb R \setminus \mathbb Q}} f(x)\\) (and both limits exist).
    
    4.  A nonzero power series \\(g(x) = \sum_{n=0}^\infty {a_n x^n}\\) that is defined for all \\(x \in \mathbb R\\).
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    1.  The step function \\(f(x) = \lfloor x \rfloor\\) is bounded, but not
        continuous on \\([0,2]\\) so not uniformly continuous.
        
        The function \\(f(x) = \sin(1/x)\\) is continuous and bounded on
        \\((0,1)\\) but not uniformly continuous.
        
    2.  The step function \\(f(x) = \lfloor x \rfloor\\) and the point \\(x =
        1\\); the limit from the left is 0 but the limit from the right is 1.
        
    3.  Let \\(f(x) = 1\\) if \\(x \in \mathbb Q\\) or \\(f(x) = 0\\) otherwise. (This function is called *the indicator function of the rationals \\(\mathbb Q\\)*) Then the limit along the rationals at any point \\(x = a\\) is 1 while the limit along the irrationals at that same point is 0.
    
    4.  We require any power series whose radius of convergence is \\(+\infty\\), for instance \\(\sum \frac{x^n}{n^n}\\).
    
    </div>
    
2.  Answer each question with a "yes" or "no," and a brief (1 sentence) justification.

    1.  If \\(f\\) is continuous on the bounded set \\(S\\), is it uniformly continuous on \\(S\\)?
    
    2.  Is the interval \\([a, b]\\) an open set?
    
    3.  Is there is a power series that converges only on the interval \\([-1, 1)\\)?
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    1.  Not necessarily. For instance \\(f(x) = 1/x\\) is continuous on the
        bounded set \\((0,1)\\) but not unformly continuous. Also, the function
        \\(f(x) = \sin(1/x)\\) is continuous and bounded on the bounded set
        \\((0,1)\\) but not uniformly continuous.
    
    2.  No, as neither the point \\(a\\) nor \\(b\\) is interior to \\([a,b]\\).
        For instance, with \\(a\\): Let \\(\varepsilon > 0\\) and consider the
        set \\((a-\varepsilon, a+\varepsilon)\\), which contains \\(a -
        \varepsilon/2\\). But \\(a - \varepsilon/2 < a\\) is not in \\([a,
        b]\\), so this set cannot be a subset of \\([a,b]\\). \\(\varepsilon>
        0\\) was arbitrary, so \\(a\\) is not interior to \\([a,b]\\).
    
    3.  Yes. For instance \\(\sum \frac{x^n}{n}\\).
    
    </div>

3.  A real set \\(S\\) is **compact** if it contains all of its limit points. In
    other words, the set \\(S\\) is compact if, for all sequences
    \\((x_n)\\) in \\(S\\) with limits (including \\(\pm \infty\\)), \\(\lim x_n \in S\\). Let \\(S\\) be any real, compact set.
    
    1.  Show that \\(S\\) is bounded.
    
    2.  Show that \\(\bar S = \mathbb R \setminus S\\) is open.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    1.  Suppose without loss of generality that \\(S\\) is unbounded above. Then
        for all \\(n \in \mathbb N\\) there exists \\(x_n \in S\\) with \\(x_n >
        n\\). So \\((x_n) \to +\infty\\), which means that as \\(S\\) is
        compact, \\(+\infty \in S\\). But \\(S\\) is a real set, so this is a
        contradiction. So \\(S\\) is bounded.
    
    2.  Consider \\(x \in \bar S\\). Suppose \\(\forall n \in \mathbb N\\), that
        the interval \\((x - 1/n, x+1/n)\\) intersects the set \\(S\\) (otherwise,
        \\(\bar S\\) would be open!) in at least one point we will call
        \\(x_n\\). By the Squeeze lemma, \\((x_n) \to x\\), so \\(x \in S\\) and
        hence \\(x \not \in \bar S\\), but this is a contradiction. So \\(\bar
        S\\) is open.
        
        (**Remark**: If \\(\mathbb R \setminus S\\) is open, we say "\\(S\\) is *closed*")
    
    </div>
    
4.  Let \\(S \subset \mathbb R\\) be compact, and let \\(f\\) be a real-valued function that is continuous on
    \\(S\\). Show that \\(f\\) is uniformly continuous on \\(S\\).
    **Suggestion:** Follow the proof of Theorem 19.2 in the book.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    Assume \\(f\\) is not uniformly continuous on \\(S\\). Then there exists
    \\(\varepsilon >0\\) so that for each \\(\delta > 0\\) there exist \\(x,y
    \in S\\) so that \\(\vert x-y\vert < \delta\\) and yet \\(\vert f(x) - f(y)
    \vert \ge \varepsilon\\). Thus for each \\(n \in \mathbb N\\) there exist
    \\(x_n, y_n \in S\\) such that \\(\vert x_n - y_n \vert < 1/n\\) and yet
    \\(\vert f(x_n) - f(y_n) \vert \ge \varepsilon\\). By the
    Bolzano-Weierstrauss Theorem, as \\(S\\) is bounded by 3.a., \\((x_n)\\) has
    a convergent subsequence \\((x_{n_k})\\) converging to \\(x_0\\). Moreover
    as \\(S\\) is compact, \\(x_0 \in S\\). By the Squeeze lemma, notice also
    that the subsequence \\((y_{n_k})\\) must also converge to \\(x_0\\). Since
    \\(f\\) is continuous at \\(x_0 \in S\\), we have
    
    \\[ f(x_0) = \lim_{k \to \infty} f(x_{n_k}) = \lim_{k \to \infty} f(y_{n_k}) \\]
    
    So by limit laws,
    
    \\[ \lim_{k \to \infty} \left[ f(x_{n_k}) - f(y_{n_k}) \right] = 0. \\]
    
    But this contradicts that \\(\vert f(x_{n_k}) - f(y_{n_k}) \vert \ge
    \varepsilon\\) for all \\(k\\). So \\(f\\) must be uniformly continuous on \\(S\\).
    
    </div>
