---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 4"
due-date: 2017-09-15
class: f2017-369
class-name: "Linear Algebra I"
assignment: 4
points: 20
solutions: true
---

1.  Let $$\vec v$$ be the vector in $$\mathbb R^4$$ which points from
    $$P(1,-1,0,3)$$ to $$Q(0,-2,-3,-3)$$.
    1.  
        Express $$\vec v$$ as a column vector.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}

        > $$
        > \vec v = Q-P = \begin{pmatrix}-1\\-1\\-3\\-6\end{pmatrix}.
        > $$

    2.  Find the magnitude of $$\vec v$$.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
    
        > $$
        > \lVert \vec v\rVert = \sqrt{(-1)^2+(-1)^2+(-3)^2+(-6)^2} = \sqrt{47}.
        > $$
    
    3.  Find the angle from $$\vec v$$ to the vector,
    
        $$
        \vec w = \begin{pmatrix}
        0 \\ 0 \\ 1 \\ 0
        \end{pmatrix}.
        $$

        {:.solution .collapse}

        > Because $$(\lVert \vec v \rVert \lVert \vec w \rVert)(\vec v \cdot \vec
        > w) = \cos\theta$$, we get that
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{aligned}
        > \sqrt{47}\sqrt{1}(-3) &= \cos \theta \\
        > \cos^{-1}{(-3\sqrt{47})} = \theta.
        > \end{aligned}
        > $$

2.  The matrix $$R_\theta$$

    $$
    R_\theta = \begin{pmatrix}
    \cos \theta & -\sin \theta \\
    \sin \theta & \cos \theta
    \end{pmatrix}
    $$
    
    has a nice graphical explanation. If $$\vec v$$ is a 2-vector in
    $$\mathbb R^2$$, the vector $$R_\theta \vec v$$ (that is, the product of the
    matrix multiplication) has the same length as $$\vec v$$, but has been rotated by
    $$\theta$$ degrees counterclockwise ($$\theta$$ can be any angle).
    
    Let $$\vec v$$ be the 2-vector
    
    $$
    \vec v = \begin{pmatrix}
    1 \\ -2
    \end{pmatrix}
    $$
    
    Without actually computing the vector $$R_{\pi/2} \vec v$$, compute the following:
    
    1.  The dot product,
    
        $$
        \vec v \cdot \left(R_{\pi/2} \vec v\right).
        $$
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > The vector $$R_{\pi/2}\vec v$$ is the same as $$\vec v$$ but rotated
        > by $$\pi/2$$ radians. So, it is orthogonal to $$\vec v$$, meaning that
        > the dot product is $$0$$.
        
    2.  The magnitude,
    
        $$
        \lVert R_{\pi/2} \vec v \rVert.
        $$
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > The vector $$R_{\pi/2}\vec v$$ is the same as $$\vec v$$ but rotated
        > by $$\pi/2$$ radians. So, it is the same length as $$\vec v$$, and its
        > magnitude $$\lVert R_{\pi/2}\vec v \rVert = \lVert \vec v \rVert =
        > \sqrt{1^2 + (-2)^2} = \sqrt{5}$$.
        
3.  Let $$\vec {r_0}$$ be a fixed vector in $$\mathbb R^2$$. For each part,
    describe *in words* the set of all vectors $$\vec r$$ that satisfy the
    stated condition. **Hint**: Think about nice shapes. An answer which just
    re-writes the math in English will not receive full credit.
    
    1.  $$\lVert \vec {r} - \vec {r_0} \rVert = 1$$.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}

        > If the vector $$\vec {r_0}$$ is drawn starting at the origin and ending at
        > a point $$C$$, then the set of all $$\vec r$$ is the set of all vectors
        > which, when drawn starting at he origin, end in the unit circle around
        > $$C$$.
    
    2.  $$\lVert \vec {r} - \vec {r_0} \rVert \ge 1$$.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
    
        > If the vector $$\vec {r_0}$$ is drawn starting at the origin and
        > ending at a point $$C$$, then the set of all $$\vec r$$ is the set of
        > all vectors which, when drawn starting at he origin, end in or outside
        > of the unit circle around $$C$$.
    
4.  Explain why the line of 3-vectors,

    $$
    L = \left\{ \begin{pmatrix}0 \\ 2 \\ 1\end{pmatrix} + t\begin{pmatrix}1 \\ -1 \\ 0\end{pmatrix} \;\middle|\; t \in \mathbb R \right\}
    $$
    
    is not a vector space.
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > You only have to show that $$L$$ fails one of the vector space axioms. The
    > easiest in this case is that it fails to have the zero vector $$\vec 0$$:
    >
    > Vectors in $$L$$ look like
    >
    > $$
    > \begin{pmatrix}0\\2\\1\end{pmatrix} + t\begin{pmatrix}1\\-1\\0\end{pmatrix}
    > = \begin{pmatrix}t\\2-t\\1\end{pmatrix},
    > $$
    >
    > and always have a 1 in the third component. But the zero vector is
    >
    > $$
    > \vec 0 = \begin{pmatrix}0\\0\\0\end{pmatrix},
    > $$
    >
    > which has a zero (not a 1) in the third component, and so can't be in $$L$$.
    
5.  Does there exist a linear transformation $$T: \mathbb R^2 \to \mathbb R^3$$ such that,

    $$
    T\left(\begin{pmatrix}1\\0\end{pmatrix}\right) = \begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\3\end{pmatrix},
    $$
    
    $$
    T\left(\begin{pmatrix}0\\1\end{pmatrix}\right) = \begin{pmatrix}-1\\2\\1\end{pmatrix},
    $$
    
    and,
    
    $$
    T\left(\begin{pmatrix}5\\1\end{pmatrix}\right) = \begin{pmatrix}4\\12\\1\end{pmatrix}?
    $$

    Justify your answer.
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > No. If $$T$$ were linear then
    >
    > $$ 
    > \begin{aligned} T\left(\begin{pmatrix}5\\1\end{pmatrix}\right) &=
    > T\left(\begin{pmatrix}0\\1\end{pmatrix} +
    > 5\begin{pmatrix}1\\0\end{pmatrix}\right) \\ &=
    > T\left(\begin{pmatrix}0\\1\end{pmatrix}\right) +
    > 5T\left(\begin{pmatrix}1\\0\end{pmatrix}\right) \\ &=
    > \begin{pmatrix}-1\\2\\1\end{pmatrix} + 5\begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\3\end{pmatrix} \\
    > &= \begin{pmatrix}4\\12\\16\end{pmatrix}
    > \end{aligned} 
    > $$
    >
    > But this is *different* from what the problem says it should be:
    >
    > $$
    > T\left(\begin{pmatrix}5\\1\end{pmatrix}\right) = \begin{pmatrix}4\\12\\1\end{pmatrix}.
    > $$
    >
    > So $$T$$
    > can't be linear.
