---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 7"
due-date: 2017-10-13
class: f2017-369
class-name: "Linear Algebra I"
assignment: 7
points: 20
solutions: true
---

1.  Consider the set of vectors in $$\mathbb R^3$$:

    $$
    S = \left\{ 
    \begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\3\end{pmatrix},
    \begin{pmatrix}2\\4\\6\end{pmatrix},
    \begin{pmatrix}1\\0\\1\end{pmatrix},
    \begin{pmatrix}1\\4\\5\end{pmatrix}
    \right\}
    $$
    
    1.  Find a vector in $$S$$ which can be expressed as a linear combination of
        the other vectors in $$S$$.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > Any vector is a fine answer here. For example, 
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{pmatrix}2\\4\\6\end{pmatrix} = 2\begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\3\end{pmatrix}
        > $$

        
    2.  Make a new set of vectors $$T$$ by removing your vector from part (a)
        from $$S$$. Is $$T$$ linearly independent? Explain.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > Based on our answer to (a), we'd get
        >
        > $$
        > T = \left\{ \begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\3\end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix}1\\0\\1\end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix}1\\4\\5\end{pmatrix} \right\}
        > $$
        >
        > This set isn't linearly dependent, since,
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{pmatrix}1\\4\\5\end{pmatrix} = 2\begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\3\end{pmatrix} - \begin{pmatrix}1\\0\\1\end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        
    3.  Find a vector in $$T$$ which can be expressed as a linear combination of
        the other vectors in $$T$$.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > From our discussion in (b)
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{pmatrix}1\\4\\5\end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\3\end{pmatrix} + \begin{pmatrix}1\\0\\1\end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        
    4.  Make a new set of vectors $$U$$ by removing your vector from part (c)
        from $$T$$. Is $$U$$ linearly independent? Explain.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > Based on our answer to (c), we'd get
        >
        > $$
        > U = \left\{ \begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\3\end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix}1\\0\\1\end{pmatrix} \right\}
        > $$
        >
        > which is a linearly independent set of vectors since the matrix,
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{pmatrix}1 & 1 \\ 2 & 0 \\ 3 & 1 \end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        >
        > has reduced row echelon form
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{pmatrix}1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        >
        > that has a pivot in every column.
        
2.  A **unit vector** is a vector whose magnitude is 1.

    1.  Describe all unit vectors $$\vec x$$ in $$\mathbb R^2$$.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > There are a few different ways to express this answer. One way is any vector of the form,
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{pmatrix} \cos \theta \\ \sin \theta \end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        >
        > for any $$\theta$$.
    
    2.  For which unit vectors $$\vec x$$ is
    
        $$
        S = \left\{ \begin{pmatrix}1\\0\end{pmatrix}, \vec x \right\}
        $$
        
        a basis for $$\mathbb R^2$$?
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > Any answer to part (a) **except**
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{pmatrix}\pm 1 \\ 0\end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        >
        > works, since the determinant of the matrix
        >
        > $$
        > \begin{pmatrix}1 & \cos \theta\\ 0 & \sin \theta\end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        >
        > is $$\sin \theta$$. That is, it is a basis so long as $$\theta \ne \pi n$$.
        
        
3.  
    1.  Find a basis for the vector space of diagonal $$2 \times 2$$ matrices.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}

        > There are many correct answers. One standard one is,
        >
        > $$
        > \left\{ \begin{pmatrix}1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0\end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix}0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1\end{pmatrix} \right\}
        > $$
    
    2.  An **upper triangular** matrix is a matrix whose entries below diagonal
        entries are all 0. Find a basis for the vector space of upper triangular
        $$2 \times 2$$ matrices.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
    
        > There are many correct answers. One standard one is,
        >
        > $$
        > \left\{ \begin{pmatrix}1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0\end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0\end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix}0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1\end{pmatrix} \right\}
        > $$

        
4.  Consider the two bases for $$\mathbb R^2$$;

    $$
    B = \left\{
    \begin{pmatrix}2\\2\end{pmatrix},
    \begin{pmatrix}4\\-1\end{pmatrix}
    \right\} \qquad
    C = \left\{
    \begin{pmatrix}1\\3\end{pmatrix},
    \begin{pmatrix}-1\\-1\end{pmatrix}
    \right\}
    $$
    
    1.  Find a matrix $$M$$ that changes column vectors for basis $$B$$ into
        column vectors for basis $$C$$.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
    
        > The matrix,
        >
        > $$
        > M_B = \begin{pmatrix}2 & 4 \\ 2 & -1\end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        >
        > changes $$B$$-vectors into standard vectors, and the matrix
        >
        > $$
        > M_C = \begin{pmatrix}1 & -1 \\ 3 & -1\end{pmatrix}
        > $$
        >
        > changes $$C$$-vectors into standard vectors. On the other hand,
        > $$M_C^{-1}$$ changes standard vectors into $$C$$-vectors.
        >
        > So the matrix $$M_C^{-1} M_B$$ changes $$B$$-vectors into $$C$$-vectors.

        
    2.  Find a matrix $$N$$ that changes column vectors for basis $$C$$ into
        column vectors for basis $$B$$.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
    
        > We want to do the opposite of what we did in (a). This means, we want
        > the inverse of our answer: $$(M_C^{-1} M_B)^{-1} = M_B^{-1}M_C$$ is
        > the matrix that changes $$C$$-vectors into $$B$$-vectors.

5.  Is 5 an eigenvalue of the matrix:

    $$
    \begin{pmatrix}1&4\\2&3\end{pmatrix}?
    $$
    
    Explain your answer.
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > Yes, it is. This is because, if we plug in $$5$$ into the characteristic
    > polynomial of the matrix, we get the determinant of the matrix,
    >
    > $$
    > \begin{pmatrix}1-5 & 4 \\ 2 & 3-5\end{pmatrix}
    > $$
    >
    > which is zero.


