---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 1"
due-date: 2019-09-06
class: f2019-301
class-name: "Math 301"
class-uids: 
  - 86328
assignment: 1
points: 25
solutions: true
---

While you don't have to write formal proofs for many solutions, if you're only
writing symbols, you're not explaining things. Make sentences by adding in a few
English words to explain your reasoning to me.

1.  How many ways are there to pair up 5 students into two groups of two
    (leaving one odd-student-out)?
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    There are \\(\binom 5 2\\) ways to form a first pair, then \\(\binom 3 2\\)
    to form the second pair. There are 2 pairs, and their order doesn't matter,
    so the answer is:
    
    \\[ \binom 52 \binom 32 \frac{1}{2!} \\]

    </div>

2.  How many subsets does that set $$A = \{1,2,3,4,5\}$$ have? How many of the
    subsets have cardinality 3?
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">

    There are \\(2^{\vert A \vert} = 2^{5}\\) subsets of \\(A\\), of which \\(\binom 5 3\\) have cardinality 3.

    </div>


3.  Let $$A$$ and $$B$$ be sets. If $$A \cap B = \emptyset$$, what is $$A \setminus B$$? $$A \Delta B$$?

    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">

    As they are disjoint, \\(A \setminus B = A\\) and \\(A \Delta B = A \cup B\\).

    </div>

4.  Explain why $$\vert A \cap B \vert + \vert A \cup B \vert = \vert A \vert + \vert B
    \vert$$. A picture will help.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">

    We'll use the fact that if \\(S, T\\) are disjoint then \\(\vert S \cup T \vert = \vert S \vert + \vert T \vert\\).
    
    First notice that \\((A \setminus B)\\) and \\((A \cap B)\\) are disjoint and \\((A \setminus B) \cup (A \cap B) = A \\). So \\(\vert A \vert = \vert A \setminus B \vert + \vert A \cap B \vert\\). For similar reasons, \\(\vert B \vert = \vert B \setminus A \vert + \vert A \cap B \vert\\).
    
    Now notice that \\(A \cup B = (A \setminus B) \cup (A \cap B) \cup (B \setminus A)\\), where the three sets on the right hand side are all disjoint. So:
    
    $$
    \begin{align*}
    \vert A \cup B \vert &= \vert A \setminus B \vert + \vert A \cap B \vert + \vert B \setminus A\vert \\
    &= \vert A \vert + \vert B \setminus A \vert \\
    &= \vert A \vert + \vert B \setminus A \vert + \vert A \cap B \vert - \vert A \cap B \vert \\
    &= \vert A \vert + \vert B \vert - \vert A \cap B \vert
    \end{align*}
    $$
    
    So \\(\vert A \cup B \vert = \vert A \vert + \vert B \vert - \vert A \cap B \vert\\), but this is equivalent to what we were trying to prove.

    </div>

5.  If one were to roll 4 identical 3-sided dice (ignoring for a moment how a
    3-sided die would look!), how many outcomes are possible?
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    To any dice roll, we could sort the dice in a row so that the lower-valued dice are to the left of the higher-valued dice. We could put toothpicks between dice of a value difference by 1 (and so 2 if value difference of 2, and so on).
    
    There are \\(4 + (3-1)\\) slots to be filled with dice and toothpicks, and we place \\((3-1)\\) toothpicks because the dice take on 3 different values separated by 1. So the number of outcomes is:
    
    \\[ \binom {4 + (3-1)}{3-1}\\]

    </div>

