---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 10"
due-date: 2019-11-22
class: f2019-301
class-name: "Math 301"
class-uids: 
  - 86328
assignment: 10
points: 20
solutions: false
---

**Reading**: Read sections 8.4 and 9.1

**Exercises**:

1.  Prove that a graph with \\(n\\) vertices and \\(m\\) edges has at least
    \\(n-m\\) connected components.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="d-none">
    
    Say there are \\(k\\) connected components and each connected component has
    \\(v_i\\) vertices in it. Then each connected component has at least
    \\(v_i - 1\\) edges in it (if it had this few edges it would be a tree which
    is minimally connected).
    
    So \\(n = \sum_{i=1}^k v_i\\) and \\(m \ge \sum_{i=1}^k (v_i - 1) = n - k\\)
    so we see that \\(k \ge n - m\\).
    
    </div>

2.  A planar drawing of a planar graph with all vertex degrees exactly 3 has
    only pentagonal (5-sided) and hexagonal (6-sided) faces. Show that it has
    exactly 12 pentagonal faces.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="d-none">
    
    Call the planar drawing \\(M\\), and say that \\(M\\) has \\(v\\) vertices,
    \\(e\\) edges, and \\(f\\) faces. Let \\(p\\) be the number of pentagons and
    let \\(h\\) be the number of hexagons in the planar drawing. We know in
    particular that \\(f = p + h\\) and \\(2e = 5p + 6h\\).
    
    We know that the total vertex degree of \\(M\\) is twice the number of
    edges, \\(\sum_i \deg v_i = 2e\\). Since each vertex has degree is exactly 3
    we deduce that \\(3v = 2e\\).
    
    Now Euler's formula implies that \\(6v - 6e + 6f = 12\\), and we can
    manipulate this to see that
    
    $$
    \begin{align*}
    6v - 6e + 6f &= 12 \\
    4e - 6e + 6f &= 12\\
    6f &= 12 + 2e \\
    6p + 6h &= 12 + 5p + 6h \\
    p &= 12,
    \end{align*}
    $$
    
    showing that the number of pentagons must be exactly \\(12\\).
    
    </div>

3.  Prove that if a tree has a vertex of degree \\(d\\) then it has at least
    \\(d\\) leaves.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="d-none">
    
    If \\(d = 0\\) the statement is vacuously true as all trees have at least 0
    leaves. If \\(d = 1\\) then the tree already has one leaf, the vertex of
    degree 1.
    
    Say we start with a tree \\(T\\) that has a vertex \\(v\\) of degree
    \\(d\\). If there is any vertex \\(w\\) that is a leaf vertex that is not
    connected to \\(v\\) by an edge, delete it and its edge (this is the
    opposite of step (ii) in our growth procedure). This step at no point
    disconnects the tree, so at some point we will arrive with a "star," a tree
    with one central vertex \\(v\\) of degree \\(d\\) and \\(d\\) adjacent leaf
    vertices.
    
    Notice that the growing procedure can never decrease the number of leaves,
    as we either attach a new leaf to an old leaf (and the number of leaves is
    constant) or we attach the new leaf to a non-leaf vertex (and the number of
    leaves grows by 1). As the original tree can be grown from the \\(d\\)-star
    tree with \\(d\\) leaves by following our sequence of deletions in reverse,
    the original tree must have at least \\(d\\) leaves itself.
    
    <div>

4.  How many labeled 7-vertex subgraphs of the labeled complete graph on 7
    vertices \\(K_7\\) either have cycles or are disconnected?
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="d-none">

    There are \\(2^{\binom 72}\\) 7-vertex subgraphs of the complete graph. Of
    these, exactly \\(7^5\\) are both connected and cycle-free (that is to say,
    trees) So, there are \\((2^{\binom 72} - 7^5)\\) 7-vertex subgraphs of
    \\(K_7\\) that either have a cycle or are disconnected.

    </div>
