---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 12"
due-date: 2019-12-13
class: f2019-301
class-name: "Math 301"
class-uids: 
  - 86328
assignment: 12
points: 0
solutions: true
---

**Note**: 

This homework assignment will not be collected or graded; it is here
for practice and to give an example of a homework that we would have on the
end-of-semester material.

**Exercises**:

1.  Draw a graph that is not 4-colorable but is 5-colorable.

    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">

    The complete graph \\(K_5\\) is 5-colorable but not 4-colorable.

    </div>

2.  Show by example that if we don't assume the triangle inequality, then a tour
    found by the Tree Shortcut Algorithm can be longer than 1000 times an
    optimal tour.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">

    Consider the cycle graph \\(C_3\\) with edge weights 1, 1, 4000. Then the
    optimal tour has cost \\(2(1+1)=4\\), but every TSA-produced tour has weight
    \\(1+1+4000 = 4002 > 4000 = 1000*4\\).

    </div>
    
3.  Show that a planar graph \\(G\\) with 8 vertices and 13 edges cannot be
    2-colored.

    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    By Euler's theorem, \\(G\\) must have 7 faces. If all 7 faces had degree 4
    or larger, then there would be at least \\(7*4/2 = 14\\) edges. But there
    are only 13 edges in \\(G\\), so at least one of the faces must be a
    triangle. So, \\(G\\) has an odd cycle (the triangle) and must not be
    2-colorable.
    
    </div>

4.  Explain why the following is true, or give a counterexample if it is false:
    Every planar graph can be 3-colored.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    This is false. \\(K_4\\) is planar, 4-colorable, and not 3-colorable.
    
    </div>
    
5.  Let \\(G\\) be a connected graph such that all vertices *but one* have
    degree at most \\(d\\) (one vertex is allowed to have degree larger than
    \\(d\\)). Prove that \\(G\\) is \\((d+1)\\)-colorable.
    
    {::options parse_block_html="true" /}
    
    <div class="solution collapse">
    
    If no vertex of \\(G\\) has degree larger than \\(d\\), then the result is
    immediate by Brooks's Theorem.
    
    On the other hand we will use induction. Let \\(D \ge d+1\\) be the degree
    of the one vertex \\(v\\) in the graph with degree larger than \\(d\\). If a
    graph has fewer then \\((D+1)\\) vertices this vertex cannot exist. So,
    consider any graph with \\((D+1)\\) vertices whose degrees are all less than
    \\(d\\) except for the vertex \\(v\\). The vertex \\(v\\) must be connected
    to all other vertices in the graph, so removing \\(v\\) yields a graph that
    has vertices all of which have degree at most \\((d-1)\\) and is by Brooks's
    Theorem \\(d\\)-colorable. Take a \\(d\\)-coloring and reintroduce \\(v\\),
    coloring it with the \\((d+1)\\)st color.
    
    Now suppose that for some \\(D+1 \le n\\) we know that a graph of \\(n\\)
    vertices with a large vertex \\(v\\) of degree \\(D\\) and the rest degree
    \\(\le d\\) is \\((d+1)\\)-colorable. Consider a graph of \\((n+1)\\)
    vertices with this degree property, and let \\(w\\) be any vertex in the
    graph with degree \\(\le d\\). Removing \\(w\\) yields a graph of \\(n\\)
    vertices, and is by our inductive hypothesis \\((d+1)\\) colorable.
    Reintroducing \\(w\\), we see that \\(w\\) is connected to at most \\(d\\)
    different vertices of at most \\(d\\) different colors and hence there is a
    color with which we can color \\(w\\).
    
    Hence by induction, we are finished.

    </div>
