---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 4"
due-date: 2018-02-23
class: s2018-369
class-name: "Linear Algebra I"
assignment: 4
points: 20
solutions: true
---
$$\newcommand{\tr}{\operatorname{tr}}$$

1.  The *rotation matrix* $$R_\theta$$ is a matrix whose multiplication rotates
    vectors in $$\mathbb R^2$$ by $$\theta$$ radians counterclockwise. $$R_\theta$$ has the formula,
    
    $$
    \begin{pmatrix}
    \cos \theta & -\sin \theta \\
    \sin \theta & \cos \theta
    \end{pmatrix}
    $$
    
    1.  Calculate the determinant of $$R_\theta$$. Does it depend on $$\theta$$?
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > The determinant is $$\cos^2(\theta)+\sin^2(\theta) = 1$$, so it
        > doesn't depend on $$\theta$$.
        >
        > That the determinant is 1 means that the matrix $$R_\theta$$ doesn't
        > change volumes of shapes.
    
    2.  *Without doing any Gaussian elimination or using the formula for
        inverses of $$2 \times 2$$ matrices*, find a concise formula for
        $$(R_\theta)^{-1}.$$ (Hint: Think about what $$R_\theta$$ does
        geometrically).
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > The matrix rotates everything simultaneously by $$\theta$$ radians.
        > How can you undo a rotation? Rotating the other way! You do that by
        > rotating just the *negative* amount of radians.
        >
        > So, $$R_\theta^{-1} = R_{-\theta}$$
        
        
    3.  Find a non-identity matrix $$B \ne I$$ for which $$B^3 = BBB = I$$.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > We can use a rotation matrix for an example here. The matrix
        > $$R_{2\pi/3}$$ will rotate things by a third of the way around;
        > rotating by this much exactly three times yields a full rotation. But
        > nothing changes after a full rotation! So $$R_{2\pi/3}^3 = I$$.

2.  If $$A$$ is an $$n \times n$$ symmetric matrix (that is, $$A^T = A$$), and
    $$B$$ is any $$n \times m$$ matrix, show that the following are symmetric:
    
    1.  &nbsp;$$B^TB$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > We check, $$(B^TB)^T = B^T (B^T)^T = B^TB$$
    
    2.  &nbsp;$$BB^T$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > We check, $$(BB^T)^T = (B^T)^T B^T = BB^T$$

    3.  &nbsp;$$B^TAB$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > We check, $$(B^TAB)^T = B^T A^T (B^T)^T = B^TAB$$ because $$A^T = A$$.

3.  Find the following determinants:

    1.  $$\det \begin{pmatrix}2 & 3 & 7 & 0 \\ 0 & -3 & 1 & 3 \\ 0 & 0 & -1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & -2\end{pmatrix}$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > The matrix is upper triangular, so the determinant is the product of
        > its diagonals. So, the determinant is $$(2)(-3)(-1)(-2) = -12$$.

    
    2.  $$\det \begin{pmatrix}1 & -4 & 1 \\ 0 & 3 & 1 \\ 2 & -8 & 2\end{pmatrix}$$
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > The first and last rows are multiples of each other. So, the matrix
        > can't be invertible, and its determinant is $$0$$.

4.  

    1.  $$A$$ is an $$n \times n$$ matrix and $$\det(A) = 2$$, find
        $$\det(3A)$$. (Hint: First calculate $$\det(3I)$$, then use that $$\det(AB) = \det(A)\det(B)$$.)
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > $$3I_n$$ is the $$n \times n$$ matrix with 3s on its diagonal, so its
        > determinant is the product of the diagonals. There are $$n$$ copies of
        > 3, so $$\det(3I)=3^n$$.
        >
        > The determinant is multiplicative, so $$\det(3A) = \det(3IA) = \det(3I)\det(A) = 3^n 2$$.
    
    2.  Is $$\det$$ a linear function on matrices?
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > **No**. Part (a) gave a counterexample to homogeneity (determinant
        > doesn't work well with scaling)

5.  

    1.  For an $$n \times n$$ matrix $$A = (a^i_j)$$ and a number $$\lambda$$, compare $$\tr(\lambda A)$$ and $$\lambda \tr(A)$$.
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > They are the same, since sums are linear. So, trace works well with scaling.
    
    2.  For a pair of $$n \times n$$ matrices $$A = (a^i_j)$$ and $$B = (b^i_j)$$, compare
        $$\tr(A+B)$$ and $$\tr(A) + \tr(B)$$.
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > They are the same, since sums are linear.
        
    3.  Is $$\tr$$ a linear function on matrices?
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > **Yes**. We just proved the two things to check above.
