---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 5"
due-date: 2018-03-02
class: s2018-369
class-name: "Linear Algebra I"
assignment: 5
points: 20
solutions: false
---

1.  Let $$\vec v$$ be the column vector in $$\mathbb R^4$$ which points from the
    point $$P = (2,-2,1,3)$$ to $$Q = (0,-4,3,1)$$.
    
    1.  Calculate the magnitude $$\lVert \vec v \rVert$$
    
    2.  Calculate the angle between $$\vec v$$ and the vector,
    
        $$
        \vec w = \begin{pmatrix}1\\-1\\0\\1\end{pmatrix}
        $$
 
2.  This question pertains to an example of something called the *cross product*
    of two vectors in $$\mathbb R^3$$. The cross product $$\vec u \times \vec
    v$$ is defined as,
    
    $$
    \begin{pmatrix}u^1\\u^2\\u^3\end{pmatrix} \times \begin{pmatrix}v^1\\v^2\\v^3\end{pmatrix} =
    \begin{pmatrix}a\\b\\c\end{pmatrix}
    $$
    
    where $$a,b,c$$ are the coefficients of the variables $$i,j,k$$ in the determinant,

    $$
    \det \begin{pmatrix} i & j & k \\
    u^1 & u^2 & u^3 \\
    v^1 & v^2 & v^3 
    \end{pmatrix}.
    $$

    This problem has you work out a specific example.
    
    1.  If $$i, j, k$$ are arbitrary variables, calculate:
    
        $$
        \det \begin{pmatrix} i & j & k \\
        2 & 1 & 0 \\
        0 & 3 & 1 
        \end{pmatrix}
        $$
        
    2.  Let $$\vec v$$ be the vector
    
        $$
        \vec v = \begin{pmatrix} a\\b\\c \end{pmatrix}
        $$
        
        where $$a$$ is the coefficient of $$i$$ in your answer to (a), $$b$$ is
        the coefficient of $$j$$ in your answer to (a), and $$z$$ is the
        coefficient of $$c$$ in your answer to (a).
        
        Calculate the dot product,
        
        $$ 
        \vec v \cdot \begin{pmatrix}2\\1\\0\end{pmatrix}
        $$
        
    3.  Calculate the dot product,
    
        $$ 
        \vec v \cdot \begin{pmatrix}0\\3\\1\end{pmatrix}
        $$

3.  Consider the vectors,

    $$
    \vec v = \begin{pmatrix}2 \\ -1 \\ 3\end{pmatrix} \quad\textrm{and}\quad
    \vec u = \begin{pmatrix}4 \\  1 \\ 3\end{pmatrix}
    $$
    
    Find the set of **all** vectors $$\vec w$$ which are orthogonal to both of
    $$\vec v$$ and $$\vec u$$.
 
4.  Consider the matrix,

    $$
    S = \begin{pmatrix}
    4 & 3 \\
    0 & -2
    \end{pmatrix}
    $$
    
    1.  Calculate $$\det(S)$$.
    
    2.  For $$\lambda$$ a variable, solve the equation $$\det(S-\lambda I) = 0$$, where $$I$$
        is the $$2 \times 2$$ identity matrix.
        
5.  For any angle $$\varphi$$, multiplication by the matrix,

    $$
    M_\varphi = \begin{pmatrix}
    1 & 0 & 0 \\
    0 & \cos \varphi & -\sin \varphi \\
    0 & \sin \varphi & \cos \varphi
    \end{pmatrix}
    $$
    
    defines a linear transformation (a.k.a. a linear function) that rotates
    vectors $$\vec v$$ in $$\mathbb R^3$$ around the $$x$$-axis by $$\varphi$$
    radians counterclockwise.
    
    1.  If you have any vector $$\vec v$$ and you know that $$\lVert \vec v
        \rVert = 3$$, calculate $$\lVert M_\varphi \vec v \rVert$$. **Hint:** Think
        about how rotating something changes its length. The same principles
        apply here!
        
    2.  Calculate the angle between $$\begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 2 \\ 0
        \end{pmatrix}$$ and $$\begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \\ 1
        \end{pmatrix}$$.
        
    3.  Calculate the angle between $$M_{\pi/3} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 2 \\ 0
        \end{pmatrix}$$ and $$M_{\pi/3} \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \\ 1
        \end{pmatrix}$$. **Hint:** You're welcome to calculate this using matrix
        multiplication, but that might get a little exhausting. I encourage you
        to think about how this rotation will affect the angle between the vectors.
