---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 6"
due-date: 2018-03-09
class: s2018-369
class-name: "Linear Algebra I"
assignment: 6
points: 20
solutions: true
---

1.  Answer whether the following are **subspaces** of the provided vector space.

    1.  For an $$m \times n$$ matrix $$M$$ with $$m \ne n$$, is the set $$\ker(M)$$ a subspace of $$\mathbb{R}^n$$?
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > **Yes**. We talked about why the kernel is a subspace of the domain in class.
    
    2.  For an $$m \times n$$ matrix $$M$$ with $$m \ne n$$, is the set $$\mathop{\text {Im}}(M)$$ a subspace of $$\mathbb{R}^n$$?

        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > **No**. The image is a subspace of the codomain, *not* the domain.
    
    3.  Is the set of rational functions $$h(x) = f(x)/g(x)$$ (with $$g(x) \ne 0$$) a subspace of the vector space of all functions?
    
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > **Yes**. $$a h_1(x) + b h_2(x) = (af_1(x)g_2(x) + bf_2(x)g_1(x))/(g_1(x)g_2(x))$$ is itself a rational function (it has a numerator function and a denominator function).
    
    4.  For any $$3 \times 4$$ matrix $$M$$ is the set of solutions to the equation 
    
        $$
        M\vec x = \begin{pmatrix}3\\1\\-1\end{pmatrix}
        $$
        
        a subspace of $$\mathbb R^4$$?
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > **No**. $$0$$ is not a solution, so not in the set (so it can't be a subspace).

2.  
    1. How many ways are there to write the vector
    
       $$
       \begin{pmatrix}3 \\ -1 \\ 2\end{pmatrix}
       $$
       
       as a linear combination of the vectors:
       
       $$
       \begin{pmatrix}1 \\ 1 \\ 1\end{pmatrix}
       \quad\text{and}\quad
       \begin{pmatrix}1 \\ 2 \\ -1\end{pmatrix}
       $$
        
       {:.solution .collapse}
       
       > The number of ways is the number of solutions to the equation,
       >
       > $$\begin{pmatrix}1 & 1 \\ 1 & 2 \\ 1 & -1\end{pmatrix} \vec x =
       > \begin{pmatrix}3\\-1\\2\end{pmatrix}.$$
       >
       > This row reduces to the equation,
       >
       > $$\begin{pmatrix}1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 \\ 0 & -2\end{pmatrix} \vec x =
       > \begin{pmatrix}3\\-4\\-1\end{pmatrix}.$$
       >
       > There are no solutions, so there are no ways to write the vector as a
       > linear combination of the others.
       
    
    2.  If $$ad - bc \ne 0$$, how many ways are there to write the vector $$\vec x \in \mathbb R^2$$ as a linear combination of the vectors:

        $$
        \begin{pmatrix}a\\c\end{pmatrix} \quad\text{and}\quad \begin{pmatrix}b\\d\end{pmatrix}
        $$
        
        {:.solution .collapse}
        
        > The number of ways is the solution to the equation,
        >
        > $$\begin{pmatrix}a&b\\c&d\end{pmatrix} \vec y = \vec x,$$
        >
        > The matrix has nonzero determinant since $$ad-bc \ne 0$$, so it has an
        > inverse: This means there's exactly one solution, and hence exactly one way to write $$\vec x$$ as a linear combination of the two vectors.

3.  
    1. Find a set $$S$$ of vectors so that
    
       $$
       \mathop{\text{span}}{(S)} = \mathop{\text{Im}}\begin{pmatrix}
       1 & 2 & 2 & 3 \\
       1 & -1 & 2 & 0 \\
       0 & 1 & 0 & 1
       \end{pmatrix}
       $$
       
       {:.solution .collapse}
       
       > The problem mentions nothing about a basis, so we can just take the
       > span of the columns of the matrix.
       
    2. Find a set $$S$$ of vectors so that
    
       $$
       \mathop{\text{span}}{(S)} = \ker\begin{pmatrix}
       1 & 2 & 2 & 3 \\
       1 & -1 & 2 & 0 \\
       0 & 1 & 0 & 1
       \end{pmatrix}
       $$
       
       {:.solution .collapse}
       
       > This is a little harder. Remember, we're solving $$M\vec x = 0$$, where
       > $$M$$ is the matrix in the problem. The matrix row reduces to,
       >
       > $$\begin{pmatrix}1 & 0 & 2 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\end{pmatrix}.$$
       >
       > So $$z,w$$ are free and $$y = -w$$ and $$x = -2z-w$$. When $$z = 1, w = 0$$ we get a vector
       >
       > $$\begin{pmatrix}-2\\0\\1\\0\end{pmatrix},$$
       >
       > And when $$z = 0, w = 1$$ we get the vector
       >
       > $$\begin{pmatrix}-1\\-1\\0\\1\end{pmatrix}.$$
       >
       > The span of these two vectors is the kernel of the matrix.
       
4.  Suppose that the vectors $$\vec u, \vec v, \vec w$$ in $$\mathbb R^n$$ are all *nonzero* and orthogonal to each other. Is the set $$\left\{\vec u, \vec v, \vec w\right\}$$ linearly dependent? **Hint:** What happens if $$\vec u = a \vec v + b \vec w$$?

    {:.solution .collapse}

    > We'll look at this in two different ways. First, if we pretend $$\vec u =
    > a \vec v + b \vec w$$ as per the hint, we'll see that $$\vec u \cdot \vec
    > u = \vec u \cdot (a \vec v + b \vec w) = a(\vec u \cdot \vec v) + b(\vec
    > u \cdot \vec w) = 0 + 0 = 0$$. But this means $$\vec u = 0$$ which goes
    > against what the problem says. This is impossible, so the $$\vec u$$
    > cannot depend on the other two. (The same reasoning says that $$\vec v$$
    > and $$\vec w$$ can't depend on each other).
    >
    > Here's another way: Let $$M$$ be the matrix with columns $$\vec u, \vec v,
    > \vec w$$. Then the vectors are linearly independent if $$M$$ is
    > invertible. The matrix $$M^T M$$ is the matrix with the square lengths of
    > $$\vec u, \vec v, \vec w$$ along the diagonals (Why?), so it has nonzero
    > determinant (Why?), and is hence invertible with inverse matrix $$A$$. So
    > $$AM^T M = I$$ but this means $$(AM^T)M = I$$ so $$M^{-1} = (AM^T)$$. So
    > $$M$$ is invertible, meaning that the vectors are linearly independent.

5.  Answer whether the following sets of vectors are linearly independent.
    1. 
       $$
       \left\{
       \begin{pmatrix}1\\1\\0\end{pmatrix},
       \begin{pmatrix}-1\\2\\-1\end{pmatrix},
       \begin{pmatrix}2\\3\\-1\end{pmatrix}
       \right\}
       $$
       
       {:.solution .collapse}
       
       > The determinant of the matrix with these columns is $$-2$$, so the
       > matrix is invertible, and so the vectors are linearly independent.
    
    2. 
       $$
       \left\{
       \begin{pmatrix}1\\1\\0\end{pmatrix},
       \begin{pmatrix}-1\\2\\-1\end{pmatrix},
       \begin{pmatrix}0\\3\\0\end{pmatrix},
       \begin{pmatrix}1\\2\\0\end{pmatrix}
       \right\}
       $$
       
       {:.solution .collapse}
       
       > Any REF of the matrix built from these columns will have to be missing
       > at least one pivot, so these vectors have to be linearly dependent (Why?).
