---
layout: homework
title: "Homework 8"
due-date: 2018-04-13
class: s2018-369
class-name: "Linear Algebra I"
assignment: 8
points: 20
solutions: true
---

1.  Diagonalize the following matrices:
    1. The matrix,
    
       $$
       C = \begin{pmatrix}
       -1 & -5 \\
       4 & 7
       \end{pmatrix}
       $$
       
    2. The matrix,
    
       $$
       B = \begin{pmatrix}
       1 & 1 & 1 \\
       1 & 1 & 1 \\
       1 & 1 & 1
       \end{pmatrix}
       $$
       
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > 1.  This matrix does not diagonalize over $$\mathbb R$$, but it does over $$\mathbb C$$ as,
    >
    >     $$
    >     C = \begin{pmatrix}\end{pmatrix}
    >     \begin{pmatrix}\end{pmatrix}
    >     \begin{pmatrix}\end{pmatrix}^{-1}
    >     $$
    >
    > 2.  This matrix diagonalizes over $$\mathbb R$$ as,
    >
    >     $$ B = \begin{pmatrix}\end{pmatrix} 
    >     \begin{pmatrix}\end{pmatrix}
    >     \begin{pmatrix}\end{pmatrix}^{-1} $$

2.  Given the following information about the $$4 \times 4$$ real matrix $$A$$,
    answer whether: (I) $$A$$ diagonalizes, (II) $$A$$ does not diagonalize, or (III) there is not enough information to tell.
    
    1.  $$A$$ is invertible.
    
    2.  $$A$$ has 4 distinct real eigenvalues.
    
    3.  The two eigenspaces of $$A$$ are 3-dimensional and 1-dimensional.
    
    4.  $$A^{5} = 0$$.
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > 1.  There is not enough information (III). For example,
    >
    >      $$ \begin{pmatrix}2 & 0 \\ 0 & 2\end{pmatrix} $$
    >
    >     diagonalizes (in fact, it is diagonal), but
    >
    >     $$ \begin{pmatrix}2 & 1 \\ 0 & 2\end{pmatrix} $$
    >
    >     does not, although both of these matrices are invertible.
    >
    > 2.  Yes, it diagonalizes (I). If a matrix has 4 distinct eigenvalues, it
    >     has *at least* 4 linearly independent eigenvectors, which is all that
    >     a $$4 \times 4$$ matrix needs to be diagonalizeable.
    >
    > 3. Yes, it diagonalizes (I). If an eigenspace has dimension 3, that means
    >    there are at least 3 linearly independent eigenvectors, combined with
    >    the one other linearly independent eigenvector from the other
    >    1-dimensional eigenspace that makes 4 eigenvectors (which is all that
    >    is needed for a $$4 \times 4$$ matrix to diagonalize).
    >
    > 4. There is not enough information (III). All that we can conclude from
    >    that $$A^5 = 0$$ is that all of the eigenvalues of $$A$$ are zero: If
    >    $$\lambda \ne 0$$ were an eigenvalue with eigenvector $$\vec v$$, what
    >    is $$A\vec v$$? What is $$A^5 \vec v$$? Why is this impossible? But
    >    this does not give enough information about the eigenvectors to know
    >    whether or not $$A$$ diagonalizes.

3.  Show that the following matrix is orthogonal:

    $$
    M = \begin{pmatrix}
    \tfrac{1}{\sqrt 3} &  \tfrac{1}{\sqrt 3} & -\tfrac{1}{\sqrt 3} \\
    \tfrac{1}{\sqrt 2} & -\tfrac{1}{\sqrt 2} & 0 \\
    \tfrac{1}{\sqrt 6} &  \tfrac{1}{\sqrt 6} & \tfrac{\sqrt 2}{\sqrt 3}
    \end{pmatrix}
    $$
    
    **Note:** A prior version of this question had a typo---if you prove that
    that old matrix was NOT orthogonal, you are also eligible for full credit!
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > To check that a matrix is orthogonal, you just have to check that its
    > inverse is its transpose. It's hard to find an inverse in general
    > (Gaussian elimination) but easy to check whether or not a matrix $$B$$ is
    > an inverse of the matrix $$M$$: just check if $$MB = I$$ or not.
    >
    > So, we check if $$M^T$$ is the inverse of $$M$$ by computing $$MM^T$$; we
    > find that $$MM^T = I$$, so $$M^T = M^{-1}$$, meaning that $$M$$ is
    > orthogonal.

4.  A matrix $$Q$$ has characteristic polynomial $$\det(\lambda I - Q) = p_Q(\lambda) = \lambda^3 -
    2\lambda^2 + \lambda + 5$$. 
    
    1. Calculate $$\det(Q)$$.
    
    2. $$Q$$ has exactly one real eigenvalue. Does $$Q$$ diagonalize over $$\mathbb C$$?
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > 1.  Since the largest power of $$\lambda$$ is 3, we deduce that $$Q$$ is a
    >     $$3 \times 3$$ matrix. We plug $$\lambda = 0$$ into the characteristic
    >     polynomial to compute,
    >
    >     $$
    >     5 = \det(0I - Q) = \det(-Q) = (-1)^3\det(Q),
    >     $$
    >
    >     so $$\det(Q) = -5$$.
    >
    > 2. Because complex eigenvalues come in pairs, we know that $$Q$$ has one
    >     real eigenvalue and two distinct complex eigenvalues. So $$Q$$ has
    >     three distinct eigenvalues, which means that it must diagonalize over
    >     $$\mathbb C$$.
    
5.  A matrix $$R$$ has characteristic polynomial $$\det(\lambda I - R) = p_R(\lambda) = \lambda^2 - 7\lambda + 12$$.

    1.  Calculate $$\det(R)$$.
    
    2.  Calculate $${\rm tr}(R)$$.
    
    {:.solution .collapse}
    
    > 1. Unlike question 4, we can actually factor this characteristic
    >     polynomial as $$(\lambda -3)(\lambda - 4)$$, whence the eigenvalues of
    >     $$R$$ are $$\lambda = 3,4$$. The determinant is the product of the
    >     eigenvalues, $$\det(R) = 3(4) = 12$$.
    >
    > 2. The trace is the sum of the eigenvalues, $${\rm tr}(R) = 3+4 = 7$$.
